SEO / Buyer content - A Quick Explanation Of Multi-Factor Authentication (#2939)
FusionAuth/fusionauth-site: astro/src/content/blog/understanding-multifactor-authentication-mfa.mdx

## Understanding Multi-Factor Authentication

Multi-factor authentication (MFA) does what it says on the box. It requires users to provide two or more verification "factors" to gain access to a resource. To be clear, two-factor authentication is also a form of multi-factor authentication. In fact, it's the most common.

Anyway, those factors may be an application, an online account, or a service like a VPN. Traditional authentication methods rely on a single factor--something you know (like a password.) MFA adds extra layers of security by requiring something you have (like an authenticator app or SMS with a one-time password on a mobile device), or something you are (like [a fingerprint](/blog/introducing-biometric-authentication)) to help keep cybercriminals, hackers, and data breaches at bay.

This second factor and third factor make MFA a strong barrier against bad actors seeking unauthorized access. We live in a time where each week seems to bring [another news story](/blog/grammarly-proves-ciam-not-optional) of a security breach. If today is the most important time to have better security, tomorrow will be even more important.

## The Importance of MFA in Cybersecurity

> It would be hard to overstate how important MFA is. As we mentioned earlier, we see new threats emerging all the time. These threats [grow more sophisticated](blog/fusionauth-releases-advanced-threat-detection), and the limitations of simple password protection becomes glaringly evident. While passwords were once considered to be the highest form of security, they're now easily compromised. Phishing attacks, social engineering, and brute force methods are like a wrecking ball against a glass house.

Reviewer: Some implementations of passwords can be easily compromised, correct implementations and strong passwords are still not a trivial thing to break.  You may want to say something like

  ```suggestion
It would be hard to overstate how important MFA is. As we mentioned earlier, we see new threats emerging all the time. These threats [grow more sophisticated](blog/fusionauth-releases-advanced-threat-detection), and the limitations of simple password protection becomes glaringly evident. While passwords were once considered to be the highest form of security, they're now susceptible to common vulnerabilities. Phishing attacks, social engineering, and brute force methods are like a wrecking ball against a glass house.
```

If you wanted to add humor you could say something in addition like: Not to mention the sticky note issue, which is like bird poop on your jacket. (or some other funny analogy.)

## The Authentication Methods at Your Disposal

When we talk about the factors available in MFA, we're referring to the various forms of verification used in conjunction with one another. These fall into three categories.

1.  Something You Know - This includes passwords, PINs, or answers to security questions. It's the most traditional form of authentication but also the most vulnerable when used by itself.

2.  Something You Have - This category covers devices or items in your possession that can generate or receive a verification code. Apps like the Google Authenticator, a device like a Yubikey, or even push notifications sent directly to a phone fit into this category. The use of a device provides a physical layer of security, making unauthorized access more challenging.

> 3.  Something You Are -  This involves biometric verification. It's quite literally answering the question of "who are you?" These methods include fingerprint scans, facial recognition, or iris scans. Some services are even using voice intonation as a form of biometrics. Biometrics are highly secure because they are unique to each person. They're also inherently complex, and hard to replicate.

Reviewer: I thought I recently read something about digital ids from you too.  If you are looking for key works, may be worth slipping in here.

By leveraging a combination of these factors, MFA plays a crucial role in creating security measures that significantly reduces the risk of unauthorized access while still keeping user experience in mind.

## When to Implement Multi-Factor Authentication

> Deciding when to require MFA involves a careful assessment of risk, convenience, and the value of the protected assets. Generally, MFA is crucial in the following scenarios:

Reviewer: These bullet points are off on their formatting.  The text should be on the line with the dot. Not sure why.

![Screenshot 2024-03-14 at 4 08 39 PM](https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-site/assets/137117976/5654d28f-f21c-4d11-a876-66891685bb92)

Author: Not sure why it's showing like that for you. On localhost it's rendering correctly. 
<img width="733" alt="Screenshot 2024-04-03 at 10 57 09 AM" src="https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-site/assets/7458729/efbb3fee-94f5-4afe-ae1e-a002bf186d67">

Reviewer: I am still getting the bullet points offset.  It appears to be fine in Safari, but wonky in Chrome.

Author: Yep, verified that it's broken on my machine too. I'll ping @lyleschemmerling

- [Compliance Requirements](/articles/authentication/mfa-compliance-fusionauth): Certain industries and regulations mandate the use of MFA to protect sensitive data. For organizations subject to these regulations, implementing MFA is a legal necessity.

- High-Profile Accounts: Accounts with elevated privileges or access to critical systems should always be protected with MFA. This ensures that even if a password is compromised, the system remains secure against unauthorized changes or breaches.

Incorporating MFA has become increasingly user-friendly. Many platforms offer seamless MFA experiences that balance security with convenience, making it an accessible option for organizations of all sizes.

## Beyond Multi-Factor Authentication

While MFA represents a significant leap forward in authentication security, the journey doesn't end here. The landscape is continually evolving, with new technologies and methodologies on the horizon. We're already seeing the uptake of biometrics. AI and machine learning have ushered in behavioral analytics and adaptive MFA. Decentralized identity models promise to further redefine what it means to secure our digital identities.

> It's crucial to stay informed and adaptive, embracing advances that offer better security without sacrificing usability. The balance between security and convenience will always be a moving target. With tools like MFA at our disposal, we're better equipped to face these challenges.

Reviewer: it could be worth mentioning here that staying up to date on all these advancements can be daunting, that's why products like ...say.. I don't know... FusionAuth are so valuable. ;)
